Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
We'll be talking to science fiction author Theodore Sturgeon this week, completing an
interview we began some months ago.
Sturgeon, of course, has been a science fiction fantasy writer since the Golden Age of Science
Fiction, beginning in the late 1930s.
Many of his novels and short stories are classics in the field, and his influence on writers
who came after him has been incalculable.
Sturgeon is noted as a stylist.
That is, as a writer whose use of language is both distinctive and remarkable.
We asked him if his style was natural to him or if it was a deliberate choice.
It's absolutely deliberate.
The creation of his style, as you can go a long way in the literary business, Steinbeth
did it, Aldous Huxley did it.
One of the stunning examples is Ray Bradbury.
But you develop a style and then you stick to it, very soon you become imitable.
That is to say, anybody with any real facility with words can sit down and write a pure paragraph
of Steinbeth.
Or for that matter, Hemingway.
To imitate Hemingway and Steinbeth is very, very easy.
And Bradbury particularly is extremely easy to imitate.
But you don't imitate Samuel Delaney, for example.
You don't imitate, I mean, nothing by the paragraph.
I'm not saying that you can sit down and write a Bradbury story or a Hemingway story.
That's a different matter.
But you're talking just about the matter of style.
And yes, it's a very conscious effort on my part to be able to write with facility
in any of a number of styles.
And sometimes the first person's stories.
And I write out of the mouth of the person's talking.
And not everybody talks in a high literary style.
That's what I fought Aldous Huxley for mostly.
You read an Aldous Huxley novel and Aldous Huxley talks like Aldous Huxley.
And old men talk like Aldous Huxley.
And little girls talk like Aldous Huxley.
It's a monotone.
All the words come out of all the mouths with the same kind of cadence.
And I don't consider this really top writing.
Why I admire Delaney so much is that when he talks ghetto black, it is for real.
But if he has two characters discussing modern American poetry, they talk in the terms of
William Carlos Williams or T.S. Eliot.
And he knows, he's got a good ear.
He knows the cadence of this kind of writing.
And I admire that so very much.
That you can't imitate.
And so I consciously do that.
Sturgeon's style is often as important to the impact of his stories as character or plot is.
And he's been praised often for his attention to language.
But he's not always satisfied with his work.
One of his better known stories, microcosmic God, he would like to disown.
It's based on a fascinating concept, a miniature world,
created by a scientist with tiny intelligent beings on it.
The scientist can observe centuries of development in the micro-society
because these creatures live at a greatly accelerated pace.
And as the tiny beings achieve an advanced high technology society,
the scientist spies on them and uses their discoveries for his own purposes.
But Sturgeon is not happy with his story.
Yeah, I'm not too fond of that story.
Not because the idea isn't unique, it is.
That was a brand new kind of an idea.
But because it was so badly written, it was the first science fiction story I wrote.
And there was so much that I did not know about writing.
One of the most important things about people as a whole,
and if you're going to write people well, is that nobody's all bad.
Nobody's all good either.
But the heavy in there was the bank president.
That he's cut out of 100% pure cardboard.
He is so poorly written.
And that hangers me every time I think of it.
If I were to write it today, it would be very dimensional.
And there'd be some good things about him too.
And then you could believe in the idea itself of the little people under the dome.
It was so overwhelming that nobody else but me apparently noticed how badly that story is written.
More Theodore Sturgeon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show.
A production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Theater surgeon has always constructed real, believable characters in his science fiction
and fantasy.
Which used to be unusual in science fiction back in the 30s and 40s when Sturgeon was
establishing his reputation as a writer.
Many of Sturgeon's people are, in some sense of the word, misfits.
They are searching for something.
They're incomplete somehow.
And they're usually different than others around them.
The characters in Sturgeon's novel, More Than Human, are good examples.
Right.
That work is built around an idiot, a pair of orphaned twins, an adolescent girl, and
a mongoloid baby, all outcast from society.
Many of Sturgeon's other stories have misfits as their protagonists, too.
We asked him why.
Well, I think a misfit has a chance to be objective.
And for one thing, he sees society as a whole from its underbelly or from way off at one
side.
Essentially, it's not so much misfits.
The key to what I write I think is loneliness.
I learned early that you can write about excitement.
You can write about adventure.
You can write love and sex and so on.
And basically, in each case, you don't hit too many people.
But if you write about loneliness, everybody's an expert.
I'm fond of saying that if you know some guy who collects pheasant feathers, and that's
his whole preoccupation, and you write a story that involves pheasant feathers, and you
know what you're talking about, he's going to love it.
But the incidence of people in the general population who collect pheasant feathers is
very small.
But the point is that because you wrote to an expert of an expertise, if you grab it,
now what are people as a whole mostly expert at loneliness?
The world is full of experts on loneliness.
It's something that everybody recognizes when he sees it.
So it's not so much that these people are misfits, it's that they're lonely.
And I think that that's the hook that I can throw into people the hardest.
Sturgeon tries to counter this loneliness with love.
He often has his characters lose their loneliness by experiencing love of some sort.
But readers should be warned that it may not be the kind of love they're used to reading about or seeing on the movie screen.
Not always.
The world well lost and case and the dreamer are two of the stories that concern very different sorts of love.
One of Sturgeon's best known stories is the powerful statement on love and compassion, though it's the highest sort of love given to the whole human race.
The story is called Thunder and Roses, and it was published not long after the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima.
The United States has been devastated by nuclear attack, and the last American military installation that could retaliate chooses not to.
The reason is to save humanity, to give our species a chance to rebuild.
Sturgeon talks about the story.
That's a very interesting story. That was written when the death was still settling over Hiroshima.
It's probably the first atomic boom story that was written after the bomb was dropped.
It was written in late 1945.
I wrote that with considerable passion.
There wasn't anybody in the world who understood what had happened, except the people in the science fiction fraternity,
and maybe one or two rather forward-thinking scientists at Oak Ridge and the state of Washington.
And for the rest of the world, it's just another big bang.
But in science fiction, there, John Campbell had been publishing
Atomic Power and Atomic War stories for 15 years before that.
And we all understood what had happened.
Every single person who'd been writing or reading science fiction understood precisely what had happened and what it meant to the world.
Now, of course, it's become very much in the forefront, but we also are coming.
Very bad.
An ugly situation.
Sturgeon says he gets a lot of response about the story and it's been reprinted many times.
As a matter of fact, Ben Bober was just about to publish it in Atomic as a classic when he left.
And I don't know what the situation is for the story again, but his chances at it will show up there.
We'll continue our conversation with Theodore Sturgeon on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Coming up next is The Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
Music
And here are your hosts.
Mr. Daryl Lane and David Carson. Science Fiction Office with Theodore Sturgeon has written some great horror stories.
We asked him if he enjoys writing them.
Sometimes, yes, it's nice to give a... they have an amazing impact on people sometimes.
Although nowadays I think they're being vastly overdone.
And why people are flocking to see all these limitations of the exorcist and so on.
I don't know.
It's depressing, it really is. And each one you see, of course, has less impact than the one before.
And it's got to be more bloody and more growy and more horrible.
And more flash brains and buckets of chocor and so on.
So it loses its impact. You get overdoses and that stuff.
But there's a certain something in the titillation of horror.
I wrote one story.
It's called Professor Teddy Bear.
Years later I went to a convention and the lady came up to me and she was all closed.
She was all closed. You know, I thought my eyes out. She was so furious.
For having written that story, it seemed that when she read it,
she didn't get to sleep for two weeks. And in some peculiar way
she blamed me for it. That is, as if I had personally written it,
personally to upset her.
However, that kind of reaction is very rare. Mostly people kind of
enjoy it because basically they know their states
and state of the fact that you have been living in terror for a little while.
Another of Sturgeon's horror stories that has had a profound effect on some people is called Bionka's hands.
It's a strange mood story about an idiot, a woman named Bionka,
who has beautiful, sensuous hands with a life all their own.
A young man is obsessed with her hands, marries Bionka, and the hands strangle him.
Sturgeon says the idea for Bionka's hands came to him while he was involved with the sports story.
I was hard at work at it and the idea for Bionka's hands came in plant-wise.
And I said, in fact, go away. I'm busy.
And the idea came back again. And I said,
well, finally, oh, all right. And I wrote it in about three hours, that's all.
Just to get it out of my way. And then I finished the sports story, which I sold it eventually.
But I put that manuscript in the bottom drawer.
I knew I had a very unusual story here, and I kept it like one of the family jewels.
And in about three years, I got hungry enough to say, well, I got to sell the family jewels.
And I found my amazement. I couldn't give the story away.
It was nearly ten years before anybody would look seriously at it.
But in the meantime, where I submitted it, it made...well, there were two occasions.
One's an editor and one's an agent. They say, bring your stuff around and let's have a look at it, you know.
I come around on Tuesday. I do it on Tuesday. And the secretary says,
I want him to get a guy sitting there and he's crumbling with anger. He's furious.
He says, here, take this stuff. Once he puts it off on the floor, I had to pick it up.
Take this stuff and get out of here. I don't want to deal with anybody right this door like Janke's.
Get out of here. Why? What's the matter?
What do you say to that? Never mind. I don't want to talk about it.
And, you know, I left very hurt and very puzzled.
And not knowing, you know, what was going on with these people.
Anyway, finally, a friend of mine wrote to me from England.
There was a literary contest in England in a magazine called Argosy.
And the deadline was New Year's Eve. Well, I got his letter at Christmas Eve.
So I dug this thing out of the trunk and ran it through the cup
without changing anything and sent it off. And it must have arrived, you know, within minutes
of the deadline. And it won the contest. And I beat Graham Green and John Pudney
and a number of famous people. And got the first check I'd ever seen
for over a thousand dollars. And got much glory out of it.
And it too has been repended a great number of times.
But that's the back story on that. But where the idea came from
I cannot really tell you. Sturgeon says Bianca's hands is essentially
a love story. And that on a deep psychological level, death and love are intimately related.
On our next show, we'll continue talking with science fiction author Theodore Sturgeon.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association. Produced in conjunction
with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So stay with us.
Thanks for watching.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
A commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson
and Daryl Lane. Theodore Sturgeon.
We asked him what changes he's seen in the field in the 40-plus years he's been in it.
One thing he mentioned is the quality of writing. That it has improved greatly
since the days of the Poles. And today he feels science fiction has produced authors
whose work is as good as anything being written today.
Sturgeon sees another large change too.
The other thing that's happened of course is women.
There have always been women in science fiction. As a matter of fact
somebody who started science fiction as we know it was a woman.
A lady who wrote Frankenstein as she was a teenager.
If I had a time machine I would go back and talk to that lady.
She must have been something else. Amazing woman.
Amazing. I think she was 19 when she wrote Frankenstein.
Mary Shelley.
Mary Shelley published Frankenstein in 1819, some time ago. But Sturgeon goes on to mention
the great number of modern science fiction writers who are women.
The women who have been into science fiction, one of the very best was Judy Merrill.
Back in the 40s he wrote some of the...well if you look in the hall of fame
of science fiction you'll find a Judy Merrill story in there called
That Only a Mother. Which was not only
it was not only a Judy Merrill story but it was the first story she'd ever written.
The first tale she ever made. She told her first story and that was it.
This is an extraordinary story. Really powerful.
Then there are people like I just mentioned.
Then Wild Seed for example is a lovely story.
There's Ursula K. Le Guin who has won a National Book Award.
There's Doris Bacerque who's ideas are always so
totally unexpected. There's Elizabeth Nguyen
who's on and on and on.
There are women in science fiction who are just extraordinary.
There are other ladies in Detroit who said to me that
up to now it's been...the woman
has to work twice as hard and be twice as good as a man
before she can get the same recognition. Then she added, fortunately, that's not
difficult. Which is a great line.
Surgeon believes too
that not only are there a great number of women writers of science fiction
but most of them are superior writers.
But I admire the women in science fiction so very much. Somebody said recently that
there are so many excellent women in science fiction that at long last it's possible to say that they
found a mediocre one. And it has been proved.
It had to be better than the men to get where they are. One of the
great revelations in science fiction, of course, you no problem know about it
was James Tiptree who turns out after having
a shattering success to be a lady by the name of Alice Sheldon.
That was the greatest knowledge for a lot of people.
She kept her head under her wing for so long that altered the room restarted
that she was a CIA man or that she was a collaboration between
Jerry Portell and somebody else or something.
But no sir, she's her own man.
She's good. All of her is good.
This Kate Wilhelm who writes a beautiful steady prose. Very, very good.
That's the name of Night's Wife.
So I'm more pleased than almost anything else about science fiction in that
it has led to women in to such a total degree.
And there goes almost every single one of those
really got something unique to bring to the field and to
literature as a whole. I'm fascinated by women.
I love the way they think. There is a difference.
I'm not talking just equality because there's a difference between
the way men think and the way women do.
I'm utterly fascinated by the way women think.
On our next show we'll conclude our conversation with Theodore Sturgeon.
This has been
The Science Fiction Radio Show. Production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music
Audio
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl A.
And David Carson.
Theodore Sturgeon's writing talent would have made him successful in any form of literature
he chose to work with.
But fortunately he chose science fiction, and many of his stories and novels are now among
the acknowledged classics of the field.
More than human, published in 1953, is probably his best known novel.
Some of his more famous short stories are Thunder and Roses, The Microcosmic God, Kildoser,
and Slow Sculpture, which won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards in 1970.
Sturgeon is also convinced of the worth of science fiction and keeps up with his development and changes.
We asked Sturgeon if science fiction is becoming more acceptable to the general reading public.
Yeah, science fiction is becoming the mainstream.
Really look at all the pictures that came out last year, for example, last summer, with a heavy emphasis on science fiction.
People are beginning to realize that this forefront thinking is predictive or precognitive thinking.
This is some moment.
There are a lot of people who would not recognize that 1984 was a science fiction novel until very recently.
I mean, things the aim is once wrote that the reaction to the general public and so-called serious critic to science fiction is,
hey, this is good, this can't be science fiction, or hey, this is science fiction, it can't be good.
And this is the ghetto that science fiction has to grow up in.
But if you can survive in a ghetto, you generally come out strong.
I think that's the case with science fiction now.
But I stuck with it not because I couldn't write other kinds of things,
and probably do quite well, because I simply love the field and the freedom that it gives me.
Sturgeon is also the originator of what has come to be called Sturgeon's Law.
He tells us how that came about.
Oh, that came about sometime in the 50s, and I can't remember exactly where it was,
but we would get a science fiction convention, and there was somebody who came to us.
Some people like to make an impact by getting a whole bunch of people who like a particular thing
and coming up and tearing it all to pieces.
And he'd done his homework.
He got a copy of every magazine that was in the hotel newsstand and every book,
and they spent all night leafing through them, and he had a whole forearm full of book and magazines
with bookmarks in them.
And he convulsed the audience there for about 40 minutes with examples of some of the work syntax,
some of the dumbest dialogues, some of the most improbable science, and so on,
which in those days, the science fiction was a whole lot of it.
And then he said to me right on stage,
well you're not conceived that the science fiction is 90% crap.
And I answered, I had this rush of brains with the head,
and I answered him by saying, yes, that's only because 90% of everything is crap,
which quite took the wind out of his self.
Then I was able to go on and develop the idea, which is only true,
that science fiction has been in the ghetto for so long that people say,
oh, this is like Kingsley Ames said, this is science fiction, it can't be good.
And it was unique as a literary genre in that it was not permitted at the spectrum of poor and good.
Let us say in the mystery field, everybody could distinguish between the same Mickey Spelane
and somebody like Nioh Marsh or Darcy L. Sayers.
There's a spectrum of excellence there, some of these things are better than others.
Same thing in the western, Hopalong Cassidy is not the same thing as Best Rewrits again.
But science fiction, it was all buck barges, zap guns, and space in the year 2200.
And nobody would have twice on the fact to find that there was good science fiction and bad science fiction,
and excellent and poor writing.
And that was that caused my response.
But since then that's been caused by the surgeons law, that 90% of this is bad because 90% of everything is bad.
The present company is accepted, of course.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.